Add the Expansion of Swift Macros in VS Code Blog Post of Google Summer of Code 2024 (#824)
swiftlang/swift-org-website: _posts/2030-12-28-expansion-of-swift-macros-in-vscode.md

---
layout: post
published: true
date: 2030-12-28 11:59:59
title: Expansion of Swift Macros in Visual Studio Code
author: [lokeshtr, ahoppen, adam-fowler]
---

`/* DUMMY DATE TO BE CHANGED BEFORE PR MERGE */` We're excited to announce that, with Swift 6.1, you can finally view the generated contents of a Swift Macro in Visual Studio Code and other LSP-based editors such as Neovim using the all-new "Expand Macro" Code Action.

I'm Lokesh T. R. from India. I'm a sophomore currently pursuing my bachelor's degree in Computer Science and Engineering at Vel Tech University in Chennai. I'm thrilled to share with you, my Google Summer of Code 2024 Project which I worked on with my mentors, Alex Hoppen and Adam Fowler.

## Overview

Over the summer, we worked on adding support for expansion of Swift Macros in Visual Studio Code. Our project's main goal is to implement a code action in VS Code that allows users to view the generated contents of a Swift Macro.

> Here's what it looks like to show the generated contents of a Swift Macro in a peeked editor when the "Expand Macro" Code Action is invoked by the user:

Reviewer: "peeked editor?" Maybe change to more common terminology

![Expand Macro Code Action in VS Code](/assets/images/expansion-of-swift-macros-in-vscode-blog/expand-macro-code-action.jpeg)
![Macro Expansion in Peeked Editor](/assets/images/expansion-of-swift-macros-in-vscode-blog/macro-expansion-in-peeked-editor.jpeg)

> There were also some stretch goals which include:

Reviewer: include -> included

1. Bringing Semantic Functionality (such as jump-to-defintion, quick help on hover, Syntax Highlighting, etc.) to the macro expansion being previewed.

> 2. Allowing to perform the "Expand Macro" Code Action on a macro that is present in the generated macro expansion to support the expansion of nested macros.

Reviewer: Perhaps better as "Allowing the "Expand Macro" Code Action on a nested macro that is present in the generated macro expansion"

![Quick Help on Hover - Semantic Functionality](/assets/images/expansion-of-swift-macros-in-vscode-blog/quick-help-on-hover-semantic-functionality.jpeg)
![Expand Macro Code Action for Nested Macros](/assets/images/expansion-of-swift-macros-in-vscode-blog/expand-macro-code-action-for-nested-macros.jpeg)
![Nested Macro Expansion](/assets/images/expansion-of-swift-macros-in-vscode-blog/nested-macro-expansion.jpeg)

And as a bonus, we also worked on supporting macro expansions in other LSP-based editors which by default cannot make use of the LSP extensions that we introduced.

![Expand Macro Code Action in other LSP-based editors (Neovim)](/assets/images/expansion-of-swift-macros-in-vscode-blog/expand-macro-code-action-in-other-lsp-based-editors-neovim.jpeg)
![Macro Expansion in other LSP-based editors (Neovim)](/assets/images/expansion-of-swift-macros-in-vscode-blog/macro-expansion-in-other-lsp-based-editors-neovim.jpeg)

### When can you start using this feature?

> This will be available with SourceKit-LSP bundled with **Swift 6.1 and the corresponding VS Code Swift Extension Release**. For the curious minds, This feature is available in the `main` branch of `sourcekit-lsp` and `vscode-swift` repositories, right now.

Reviewer: the curious minds, This feature -> the curious, this feature
branch of -> branch of the

## Implementation Details

### How Swift Language Features work in LSP-based editors

Let's have a look at three key components that you use in your everyday life in an LSP-based editor (e.g. VS Code):

1. VS Code-Swift Extension (Client):
   - primarily acts as a bridge between VS Code and SourceKit-LSP
2. SourceKit-LSP (Server):
   - provides the necessary editor features to VS Code
   - communicates using Language Server Protocol (LSP)
3. SourceKitD (Background Service):
   - provides the raw data and operations to SourceKit-LSP
   - shares implementation details with the Swift compiler

### Main Goal

> In order to achieve the main goal, we introduced two new LSP extensions and new custom URL scheme as follows:

Reviewer: extensions and new -> extensions and a new

```typescript
// NEW LSP EXTENSIONS (SPECIFICATIONS)
// -----------------------------------

// workspace/peekDocuments (sourcekit-lsp -> vscode-swift)
export interface PeekDocumentsParams {
  uri: DocumentUri;
  position: Position;
  locations: DocumentUri[];
}

export interface PeekDocumentsResult {
  success: boolean;
}

// workspace/getReferenceDocument (vscode-swift -> sourcekit-lsp)
export interface GetReferenceDocumentParams {
  uri: DocumentUri;
}

export interface GetReferenceDocumentResult {
  content: string;
}

// NEW CUSTOM URL SCHEME (SPECIFICATIONS)
// --------------------------------------

// Reference Document URL
("sourcekit-lsp://<document-type>/<display-name>?<parameters>");

// Reference Document URL with Macro Expansion Document Type
("sourcekit-lsp://swift-macro-expansion/LaCb-LcCd.swift?fromLine=&fromColumn=&toLine=&toColumn=&bufferName=&parent=");
```

#### Working of the "Expand Macro" Code Action

> 1. The `"workspace/peekDocuments"` request is sent from SourceKit-LSP to the editor and prompts it to show the the contents of `locations` inside the source file `uri` as a peek window at `position`. In VS Code, this executes the `"editor.action.peekLocations"` command to present a peeked editor.

Reviewer: show the the contents -> show the contents

Maybe define the term "peeked editor" at the beginning if you want to use the term in this post.

// -----------------------------------

// workspace/peekDocuments (sourcekit-lsp -> vscode-swift)
export interface PeekDocumentsParams {
  uri: DocumentUri;
  position: Position;
  locations: DocumentUri[];
}

export interface PeekDocumentsResult {
  success: boolean;
}

// workspace/getReferenceDocument (vscode-swift -> sourcekit-lsp)
export interface GetReferenceDocumentParams {
  uri: DocumentUri;
}

export interface GetReferenceDocumentResult {
  content: string;
}

// NEW CUSTOM URL SCHEME (SPECIFICATIONS)
// --------------------------------------

// Reference Document URL
("sourcekit-lsp://<document-type>/<display-name>?<parameters>");

// Reference Document URL with Macro Expansion Document Type
("sourcekit-lsp://swift-macro-expansion/LaCb-LcCd.swift?fromLine=&fromColumn=&toLine=&toColumn=&bufferName=&parent=");
```

#### Working of the "Expand Macro" Code Action

1. The `"workspace/peekDocuments"` request is sent from SourceKit-LSP to the editor and prompts it to show the the contents of `locations` inside the source file `uri` as a peek window at `position`. In VS Code, this executes the `"editor.action.peekLocations"` command to present a peeked editor.

> 2. Since the contents of the macro expansion are not represented by a file on disk, we introduce a custom `sourcekit-lsp://` URL scheme to represent the macro expansion buffers. In the future, this URL scheme can be represented for other use cases such as generated interfaces by using a `document-type` other than `swift-macro-expansion`.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Since the contents of the macro expansion are not represented by a file on disk, we introduce a custom `sourcekit-lsp://` URL scheme to represent the macro expansion buffers. In the future, this URL scheme can represent other use cases such as generated interfaces by using a `document-type` other than `swift-macro-expansion`.  
```

> macro expansion contents.

Reviewer 2: Leftover line?

Author: A bug in VS Code collapsed (that collapse toggle near the line number ">" / "v") that line into the previous line. That's why I didn't notice it.

3. To fetch the contents of this custom URL scheme, the editor client sends a `"workspace/getReferenceDocument"` to SourceKit-LSP.

![Working of the Expand Macro Code Action](/assets/images/expansion-of-swift-macros-in-vscode-blog/working-of-getreferencedocumentrequest.jpeg)

### Stretch Goals

#### Achieving Semantic Functionality (jump-to-definition, quick help on hover, syntax highlighting, etc.)

>    By default, SourceKit-LSP and SourceKitD are not equipped to handle our newly introduced Reference Document URLs. To enable semantic functionality, such as jump-to-definition, quick help on hover, and syntax highlighting, the build arguments of the file are required. To address this, we utilised the source file's build arguments and applied them to the reference documents. This effectively tricks sourcekitd into providing semantic functionality for these reference documents.

Reviewer 2: We usually use _build settings_ or _compiler arguments_, usually not _build arguments_ 😉

Author: Bruhh 😱

### Bonus

While the new LSP extensions which we introduced, don't work out-of-the-box in other LSP-based editors and requires the extension / plugin developers of respective editors to make use of it, we worked on providing a basic form of first level macro expansion support using the standard LSP Requests to support other LSP-based editors.

This works as follows:

1. SourceKit-LSP asks sourcekitd for macro expansions.
2. It then stitches all the macro expansions together in a single file.
3. It stores the file in some temporary location in the disk.
4. It then makes a `ShowDocumentRequest` to open and show the file in the editor.

## Conclusion

That wraps up our Google Summer of Code project successfully! 🎉

### Future Directions

#### 1. Feedback, Feedback, Feedback

>    We put a great deal of attention to detail, ensuring that every decision in the design process was thoughtful and deliberate. However, we understand that you might have better ideas or come across issues we haven't anticipated, and we're always eager to improve this feature. If you have suggestions or encounter any bugs, we encourage you to file an issue in either the sourcekit-lsp or vscode-swift repository, depending on where you face the problem.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   We put a great deal of attention to detail, ensuring that every decision in the design process was thoughtful and deliberate. However, we understand that you might have better ideas or come across issues we haven't anticipated, and we're always eager to improve this feature. If you have suggestions or encounter any bugs, we encourage you to file an issue in either the [sourcekit-lsp](https://github.com/swiftlang/sourcekit-lsp) or [vscode-swift](https://github.com/swiftlang/vscode-swift] repository, depending on where you face the problem.
```

   A significant challenge will involve handling positional shifts in line and character numbers caused by macro expansions. When macros expand, they often change the layout of the file, causing subsequent macros to shift from their original positions. Implementing semantic functionality and nested macro expansions in macro expansion documents for all LSP-based editors should account for these shifts, ensuring that editors can accurately track and display the correct positions of expanded macros. This adjustment is crucial to providing smooth, error-free navigation and proper context across all LSP-based editors.

#### 3. Other Use Cases for the Reference Document URL

   Reference Document URLs were built from the ground up to encode the data necessary to display any form of content. This functionality allows anyone to present any content of their choice, whether in a peeked editor or a fully open document, as long as it is generated during compile time. One such example we discussed today is the `swift-macro-expansion` document type.

>    Also, For instance, we can migrate `OpenInterfaceRequest` to Reference Document URLs to display the generated `.swiftinterface` files of modules. Additionally, we can show implicitly generated constructors and synthesized code related to `Equatable`, `Hashable`, and `Codable` conformances. Another use case involves previewing or rendering generated HTML from the Mustache template engine by integrating its CLI.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   Also, for instance, we can migrate `OpenInterfaceRequest` to Reference Document URLs to display the generated `.swiftinterface` files of modules. Additionally, we can show implicitly generated constructors and synthesized code related to `Equatable`, `Hashable`, and `Codable` conformances. Another use case involves previewing or rendering generated HTML from the Mustache template engine by integrating its CLI.
```

![Expand Macro Code Action in other LSP-based editors (Neovim)](/assets/images/expansion-of-swift-macros-in-vscode-blog/expand-macro-code-action-in-other-lsp-based-editors-neovim.jpeg)
![Macro Expansion in other LSP-based editors (Neovim)](/assets/images/expansion-of-swift-macros-in-vscode-blog/macro-expansion-in-other-lsp-based-editors-neovim.jpeg)

### When can you start using this feature?

This will be available with SourceKit-LSP bundled with Swift 6.1 and the corresponding VS Code Swift Extension Release.

For the curious minds, This feature is available in the `main` branch of `sourcekit-lsp` and `vscode-swift` repositories, right now.

## Implementation Details

### How Swift Language Features work in LSP-based editors

Let's have a look at three key components that you use in your everyday life in an LSP-based editor (e.g. VS Code):

1. VS Code-Swift Extension (Client):
   - primarily acts as a bridge between VS Code and SourceKit-LSP
2. SourceKit-LSP (Server):
   - provides the necessary editor features to VS Code
   - communicates using Language Server Protocol (LSP)
3. SourceKitD (Background Service):
   - provides the raw data and operations to SourceKit-LSP

>    - baked into the swift compiler

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   - shares implementation details with the Swift compiler
```

### Main Goal

In order to achieve the main goal, we introduced two new LSP extensions and new custom URL scheme as follows:

```typescript
// NEW LSP EXTENSIONS (SPECIFICATIONS)
// -----------------------------------

// workspace/peekDocuments (sourcekit-lsp -> vscode-swift)
export interface PeekDocumentsParams {
  uri: DocumentUri;
  position: Position;
  locations: DocumentUri[];
}

export interface PeekDocumentsResult {
  success: boolean;
}

// workspace/getReferenceDocument (vscode-swift -> sourcekit-lsp)
export interface GetReferenceDocumentParams {
  uri: DocumentUri;
}

export interface GetReferenceDocumentResult {
  content: string;
}

// NEW CUSTOM URL SCHEME (SPECIFICATIONS)
// --------------------------------------

// Reference Document URL
("sourcekit-lsp://<document-type>/<display-name>?<parameters>");

// Reference Document URL with Macro Expansion Document Type
("sourcekit-lsp://swift-macro-expansion/LaCb-LcCd.swift?fromLine=&fromColumn=&toLine=&toColumn=&bufferName=&parent=");
```

> - `"workspace/peekDocuments"` allows the SourceKit-LSP Server to show the the contents stored in the `locations` inside the source file `uri` as a peek window

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The `"workspace/peekDocuments"` request is sent from SourceKit-LSP to the editor and prompts it to show the the contents of `locations` inside the source file `uri` as a peek window at `position`.
```

> - Reference Document URL Scheme `sourcekit-lsp://` so that we can use it to encode the necessary data required to generate any form of content to which the URL corresponds to.
> - We introduce the very first `document-type` of the Reference Document URL which is `swift-macro expansion`. This will encode all the necessary data required to generate the macro expansion contents.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Since the contents of the macro expansion are not represented by a file on disk, we introduce a custom `sourcekit-lsp://` URL scheme to represent the macro expansion buffers. In the future, this URL scheme can be represented for other use cases such as generated interfaces by using a `document-type` other than `swift-macro-expansion`.
```

> - `"workspace/getReferenceDocument"` is introduced so that the Editor Client can make a request to the SourceKit-LSP Server with the Reference Document URL to fetch its contents.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- To fetch the contents of this custom URL scheme, the editor client sends a `"workspace/getReferenceDocument"` to SourceKit-LSP.
```

> The way this works is that, we generate the Reference Document URLs from the macro expansions generated using sourcekitd and make a `"workspace/peekDocuments"` request to the Editor Client. In VS Code, this executes the `"editor.action.peekLocations"` command to present a peeked editor.

Reviewer 2: I think with my suggestions above, we don’t need this paragraph anymore. But please double-check if there’s something in here that I missed.

> ![Working of PeekDocumentsRequest](/assets/images/expansion-of-swift-macros-in-vscode-blog/working-of-peekdocumentsrequest.jpeg)

Reviewer 2: How would you feel about only including the `working-of-getreferencedocumentrequest.jpeg` diagram? I think it covers everything you talk about in here (you don’t really talk about sourcekitd and the cache, which is fine).

Author: makes sense

> Since VS Code can't resolve the contents of Reference Document URL, it makes a `"workspace/getReferenceDocument"` request to the SourceKit-LSP Server, thereby retrieveing the contents and successfully displaying it in the peeked editor.

Reviewer 2: Similar here, I’m not sure if this paragraph is needed with my above suggestions. But please check.

![Working of GetReferenceDocumentRequest](/assets/images/expansion-of-swift-macros-in-vscode-blog/working-of-getreferencedocumentrequest.jpeg)

### Stretch Goals

1. Achieving Semantic Functionality (jump-to-definition, quick help on hover, syntax highlighting, etc.):
   - SourceKit-LSP and SourceKitD by default doesn't know how to handle Reference Document URLs.
   - The build arguments of a file is needed to provide semantic functionality.
   - We used the source file's build arguments as build arguments of the reference documents to trick sourcekitd to provide Semantic Functionality for the reference documents.
2. Achieving Nested Macro Expansion:
   - Due to the flexible nature of the Reference Document URLs, nested macro expansions becomes trivial.
   - The beauty of the Reference Document URLs is that we can nest the Reference Document URLs.

>    - We set the `parent` parameter of the macro expansion reference document URL to the source file if it's a first level macro expansion or to the reference document from which the macro expansion originates if it was second or third or n-th level macro expansion. This allows us to expand nested macros efficiently.

Reviewer 2: I’m not sure how much work it would be to convert but I think prose style would be a better fit for a blog post instead of bullet points.

### Bonus

> While the new LSP Extensions which we introduced, doesn't work out-of-the-box in other LSP-based editors and requires the extension / plugin developers of respective editors to make use of it, We worked on providing a basic form of first level macro expansion support using the standard LSP Requests to support other LSP-based editors.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While the new LSP extensions which we introduced, don't work out-of-the-box in other LSP-based editors and requires the extension / plugin developers of respective editors to make use of it, we worked on providing a basic form of first level macro expansion support using the standard LSP Requests to support other LSP-based editors.
```

This works as follows:

> 1. SourceKitLSP asks SourceKitD for macro expansions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. SourceKit-LSP asks sourcekitd for macro expansions.
```

2. It then stitches all the macro expansions together in a single file.
3. It stores the file in some temporary location in the disk.
4. It then makes a `ShowDocumentRequest` to open and show the file in the editor.

That wraps up the GSoC project successfully!

### What's left to do?

- I will be working on implementing a test case that encompasses all the semantic features in all nested macro levels in sourcekit-lsp.
- I will also implement some end-to-end test cases in the vscode-swift side which ensures that they really work as intended in a real world situation.

Test cases for freestanding macros, attached macros and nested macros are already in place.

> Code Documentation is also in place for everything that we have implemented so far.

Reviewer 2: I don’t think we need to include these technical follow-up tasks in the blog post.

### Future Directions

1. Feedback, Feedback, Feedback!

   - We had put so much attention to detail and ensured that every decision made in the design process was thoughtful.
   - But, you may have a better idea, or you may find some issues, and we would love to improve this feature.

>    - Please file an issue to suggest an idea or report bugs in the sourcekit-lsp or vscode-swift repository wherever you face the issue.

Reviewer 2: I would just convert this into a paragraph instead of bullet points.

Same below.

   - With this, the custom request need not be handled by the extension / plugin developer of an LSP-based editor.

3. Migrate from generating temporary files in the Disk to Reference Document URLs for other LSP-based editors

   - We are currently unable to generate macro expansions on-the-fly in other LSP-based editors since we don't have our LSP Extension for getting the contents of the reference document.
   - Building on top of the previous idea, when LSP 3.18 gets finalised, we should be able to completely eliminate temporary file storage in favour of the standard `"workspace/textDocumentContent"` Request.

4. Adding Semantic Functionality & Nested Macro Expansion support for other LSP-based editors

   - This is tricky to implement since the temporary file (or reference document after LSP 3.18) will have all the macro expansions of a given macro in a single file.
   - Although the same approach can be used such as passing the source file's build arguments and `parent` to be the macro's originating file, there will be line and character position shifts that should be taken into consideration.

>    - For example, the third macro expansion of a given attached macro will be expected to start at `0:0` but its actual location will be shifted by the first and second macro expansion's content length and three lines of comments that describes where the macro will be present in the original file

Reviewer 2: I think these three can be merged into a single item because the ultimate goal of all of them is to provide semantic functionality / nested macro expansions for all LSP-based editors.
